Second, administration officials have justified Hagel's departure by saying Obama needed "fresh leadership" and "a different set of skills" in the Pentagon. But without shaking up either the national security staff in the White House or the centralised and risk-averse way the Obama administration makes national security policy, there is little chance of a new secretary having a big impact.

For example, when weighing the planned drawdown of US forces in Afghanistan and the military's request to keep 10,500 troops in the country after December 2014, the National Security Council held 20 meetings, including two with the president and six involving the secretary of defence. After all these meetings, the number was pared to 9,800.

Facts on the ground

Finally, Obama has increased the pressure on himself to shake up not only his personnel, but his strategy. However, Hagel's departure does not change the facts on the ground, and a new Secretary of Defence is unlikely to prompt radical changes in Obama's foreign policy.

In the Middle East, Obama may accelerate the arming and training of the Syrian opposition or deploy a handful of US ground forces in Iraq to coordinate close air support of Iraqi forces and better targeting of air strikes against ISIL, but he will not commit US troops in significant numbers or begin bombing Assad directly.

Managing the current anti-ISIL coalition will continue to be a delicate art, and improving Iraq's security will be a slow process, dependent on actions of the Iraqi government. In Europe, Obama will continue to work closely with NATO to deter further Russian aggression, including a rotational presence of rapid response forces in the Baltics, and push to maintain and increase sanctions on President Vladimir Putin's inner circle. Obama is unlikely to provide lethal arms to the Ukrainian government or open the door to Ukrainian NATO membership. In Afghanistan, the US withdrawal of troops will continue as planned.

Obama's foreign policy modus operandi to date has been one of slow and careful steps, rather than going all-in on big bets. Don't expect this to change with a new secretary of defence. Hagel's abrupt departure is for political, rather than strategic reasons.

Lawrence J Korb is a Senior Fellow at American Progress and former Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manpower, Reserve Affairs, Installations, and Logistics.


When a grand jury decided not to indict the police officer who shot and killed unarmed black teenager Michael Brown in Ferguson, Missouri, the media descended on the St Louis suburb once again. Race issues took centre stage on America's televisions and in its newspapers.

But many voices accused the mainstream media of giving too much prominence to the potential for violence and not enough to the decision itself. Young black Americans used #BlackTwitter to take journalists to task on their coverage and provide their own version of the truth. Even US President Barack Obama and the prosecutor in the case had critical words for the media.

Talking to us about the Ferguson story this week are: Malkia Cyril, founder and executive director of the Center for Media Justice who has led a number of campaigns for racial and economic justice; journalist Mikki Kendall who writes about race and feminist issues; veteran journalist Richard Prince, from the Maynard Institute for Journalism Education. Prince is known for a landmark complaint he brought against discriminatory practices at the Washington Post in 1972; and Sarah Kendzior, a reporter and anthropologist who has been named the best online journalist in St Louis.

Other stories on our radar: Justice is delayed in the Philippines as another witness is killed in the trial over the 2009 murders of 32 journalists; an outspoken journalist in China has gone on trial for revealing state secrets, as a Chinese newspaper reprimands university lecturers for portraying the country in a negative light; Iranian-Canadian blogger Hossein Derakhshan has been released from prison in Tehran after six years behind bars.

This week's feature: What is in a font? Typography, the way letters are dressed, the way words are designed may seem secondary to the meaning of the words they house. But form affects content. And in the news media, it affects the authority and the credibility of the stories being told. Helvetica conveys more neutrality than Lucida. Arial more sobriety than comic sans. Then there is the global angle to this story \96 designers of non-western fonts are up against the homogenising effects of a market dominated by Latin script. The Listening Post's Marcela Pizarro examines how the choice of typography affects the way audiences perceive the news.

Our closing video this week: Making connections online at the expense of connecting with our fellow humans. A rapper who goes by the name of Prince Ea has made a video called 'Can We Autocorrect Humanity', reminding us all what we are missing when we spend all our time with technology. It has had nearly nine million hits on Youtube, perhaps proving its own point.

Thursday's OPEC meeting in Vienna was widely billed as the most important in years. OPEC ministers decided to resist calls to cut their oil production in response to the fall in oil prices since June. After three years of holding steady around $110 a barrel, oil had dropped below $80. Within minutes of their decision, the price fell by another $5.

This was in large part a contest between OPEC and US frackers for power over the oil market. With the new technology of hydraulic fracturing, US oil production has increased by nearly 50 percent since 2008, after more than three decades of decline. By pushing prices lower OPEC hopes to restrain the growth of the costlier production.

What does this mean for climate change? OPEC's decision comes just four days before a climate summit opens in Peru, the last before a 2015 deadline to agree on post-2020 climate measures in Paris. In Vienna, the ministers agreed their plans for negotiations in Peru.

On Monday, US President Barack Obama's climate envoy admitted that a lot of the world's oil, gas and coal would have to stay in the ground in order to limit climate change. Scientists put the proportion that must be left in the ground at 80 percent of known reserves. Nearly three quarters of global oil is located in OPEC countries.

What oil price is 'fair'?

The unspoken issue in Vienna was how much of the remaining carbon budget will come from state oil companies and how much from private oil companies. How much from conventional, cheaper oil and how much from "extreme oil" sources such as shale and tar sands?

Venezuela and Saudi Arabia were at the two poles of the debate. Venezuela made the loudest calls to cut production, with the government of Nicolas Maduro struggling to contain popular discontent in light of the country's economic woes. Before the meeting, Foreign Minister Rafael Ramirez said the market ultimately needed cuts of 2 million barrels a day, and a price of $100 a barrel would be "fair". Venezuela's current budget assumes a price at least this high.


Oil prices plummet to low after OPEC decision
Iran, too, wanted a higher oil price, especially following the failure to strike a deal this week to lift the economic sanctions against the country.

Saudi Arabia, on the other hand, had earlier signalled a willingness to accept lower prices, supported by Kuwait and its other Gulf allies. With lower budgetary needs and large external reserves, they could afford it. And they worried that if OPEC cut production, the higher price would help sustain the current boom in costly, extreme oil production, especially fracked "tight oil" in the US. So, they feared, US expansion would compensate for any OPEC cut.

OPEC's choice was thus between lower oil prices or a lower share of world oil production. Both sides lobbied hard in the run-up to the meeting.

The very fact of having to make this choice shows OPEC's fundamental weakness. If it asserts its power to increase prices, it thereby reduces its power over the longer term. So it is not quite the cartel most people imagine. After all, despite possessing over 70 percent of the world's oil reserves, it accounts for only 40 percent of its oil production.

Thursday's result is that OPEC clings to its limited market power, but to questionable purpose as it fails to use it to stave off economic crises in some of its largest members.

In other words, Saudi Arabia wins. (In OPEC matters, it usually does.)

If the oil price now continues to fall, that will test the producers of US tight oil, Canadian tar sands and other costly sources. Some may become uneconomic to extract, though analysts debate the real break-even prices.

What oil price is good for the climate?

On the face of it, shutting down some of the extreme oil, which adds to the world's excess of reserves, could be seen as good news for the climate. Venezuela's Minister Ramirez told Al Jazeera that expanded US production was "a disaster for climate change". (However, he did not comment on how OPEC's reserves square with climate limits.)

The trouble is that any such reprieve from a fracking cutback will be temporary, as those reserves will not disappear. Whenever the oil price increases again, companies will come back to extract them.


Head to Head - Climate change: Fact or fiction?
A reduction in US production could only become more permanent if there were active government regulation to restrict demand for fossil fuels. Ironically then, OPEC and Saudi Arabia - generally seen as obstructive in international climate negotiations - might best be able to protect their market share with a meaningful global deal on climate.

So far that's not on OPEC's agenda. At UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon's climate meeting in New York in September, Saudi Oil Minister Ali al-Naimi argued against any climate action that would "destabilise the global energy market". He opposed any climate taxes or carbon pricing, even if only applied in developed countries.

Lower oil prices will also encourage OPEC members to talk more about diversifying their economies away from oil. But history tells us that such talk usually evaporates once the price rises again.

In the absence of a global deal, a higher oil price might have been better news for the climate, as that would make the alternatives to oil look relatively more attractive to consumers.

The vast majority of oil is used in transport, where one of the most promising alternatives is electric vehicles. The largest hurdle for their development is storage of the power. A report by investment bank UBS in August found that battery costs are falling fast. It forecast that running a battery-powered car, combined with solar panels on the roof at home, could be cheaper than a conventional oil-fuelled car by 2025, even without subsidies.

If this is right, it could imply that oil's days are numbered. Countries like Venezuela might then argue that OPEC members should get the maximum revenue from the last decades of oil extraction - and use that revenue to invest in diversifying their economies.

Whether fossil fuels stay in the ground due to low prices or high prices, OPEC has a role to play. To try, Canute-like, to hold back climate action would be as futile as trying to control the oil market.

OPEC started out in 1960 as a forum to coordinate member countries' actions in their battle for a fair deal from the "seven sisters" that then ran their oil industries: Exxon, Shell, BP, Mobil, Chevron, Gulf, and Texaco. Via a 1968 "declaratory statement of petroleum policy", and with the help of rising prices, OPEC ultimately facilitated the nationalisation of most members' oil during the 1970s.

Compared to its limited role as a cartel, where a short-term boost to price could only have come at the expense of longer-term market share, it was in coordinating that transition that OPEC really proved itself effective.

If OPEC is to make itself relevant again, perhaps it should start helping its members think beyond oil.


